>> Woodruff: THE DEVASTATED TOWN
OF MOORE BEGAN THE SHIFT FROM
SEARCH AND RESCUE TO RECOVERY
TODAY.
WE GET THE LATEST FROM OKLAHOMA
GOVERNOR MARY FALLIN.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ON THE "NEWSHOUR" TONIGHT, WE'RE
ON THE GROUND FROM MOORE, WHERE
FAMILIES ARE TAKING STOCK OF
WHAT'S LEFT OF THEIR HOMES AND
THEIR LIVES.
>> THERE IS NOTHING THAT CAN
DESCRIBE THE SOUND OF YOUR HOUSE
EXPLODING WITH YOU IN IT.
>> Woodruff: THEN, WITH ONE
I.R.S. OFFICI PLEALADING THE
FIFTH BEFORE A CONGRESSIONAL
COMMITTEE TODAY.
WE TAKE A DEEPER DIVE INTO THE
TAX-EXEMPTION LAWS AT THE NTERCE
OF THE CONTROVERSY.
>> Ifill: WE RETURN TO
BANGLADESH WITH AN INSIDE LOOK
AT THE FACTORY CONDITIONS NOW
UNDER SCRUTINY AFTER LAST
MONTH'S BUILDING COLLAPSE THAT
PEOPLE.
>> Woodruff: THE SENATE MOVED
ONE STEP CLOSER TO A
COMPREHENSIVE IMMIGRATION BILL.
WE KICK OFF A SERIES OF
CONVERSATIONS ABOUT ISSUES AT
THE HEART OF THE LEGISLATIVE
DEBATE.
>> Ifill: AND JEFFREY BROWN HAS
THE STORY OF THE HOUSTON GRAND
OPERA'S EFFORTS TO REACH OUT TO
NEW AUDIEES ANCND ENGAGE WITH
THE COMMUNITY
>> PEOPLE WANT TO SEE THEIR
STORY BEING PLAYED IN THE OPERA.
THE WANT TO SAY, "OH, I CAN
RELATE TO THAT.
THAT'S WHAT I WENT THROUGH."
>> Woodruff: THAT'S ALL AHEAD ON
TONIGHT'S "NEWSHOUR."
\60
>> Ifill: THE NUMBERS PILED UP
TODAY IN MOORE, OKLAHOMA, TWO
DAYS AFTER THE TOWN WAS RAVAGED
BY A TORNADO.
AS AUTHORITIES TOTALED THE
FINANCIAL COSTS, RESIDENTS COPED
WITH DEVASTATING LOSS, TALLYING
THE DAMAGES CLOSE TO HOME.
THE FIRST OFFICIAL ESTIMATES
CAME THIS MORNING: 12,000 TO
13,000 HOMES DAMAGED OR
DESTROYED ACROSS A DISASTER ZONE
THAT STRETCHES FOR MORE THAN 17
MILES.
AND AN INSURANCE BILL THAT COULD
TOP $2 BILLION.
THE SECRETARY OF HOMELAND
SECURITY-- JANET NAPOLITANO--
FLEW IN FROM WASHINGTON TO
PLEDGE FULL SUPPORT FROM FEMA,
THE AGENCY THAT OVERSEES
DISASTER AID.
>> WE WILL BE HERE TO STAY.
AT SOME POINT THE CAMERAS WILL
LEAVE, THE NATIONAL ONES WILL
LEAVE FIRST, THEN THE LOCAL
ONES, BUT ON BEHALF OF PRESIDENT
OBAMA AND ON BEHALF OF FEMA WE
WILL BE HERE TO STAY UNTIL THIS
RECOVERY IS COMPLETE.
>> Ifill: BY THIS MORNING, MORE
THAN A THOUSAND STORM VICTIMS
HAD REGISTERED WITH FEMA.
LOCAL OFFICIALS ARE ESTIMATING
THAT AS MANY AS 33,000 RESIDENTS
WERE AFFECTED, IN ONE WAY OR
ANOTHER.
>> I'M JUST GRATEFUL THAT WE
WEREN'T HERE.
YOU KNOW, MY WIFE'S WITH ME, SO
THAT'S ALL I COULD ASK FOR.
>> Ifill: THIS AFTERNOON MORE OF
THEM WERE ALLOWED BACK TO SEE
WHAT REMAINED OF THE LIVES THEY
KNEW BEFORE THE STORM.
>> IT'S JUST HARD TO IMAGINE
THAT ONE DAY YOU WALK OUT OF
YOUR HOUSE AND THE NEXT FEW
MINUTES YOU COME BACK AND IT
LOOKS LIKE THIS.
>> THIS IS THE FIRST TORNADO
I'VE BEEN IN, SO THAT WAS
SOMETHING ELSE.
I DON'T WANT TO DO IT AGAIN.
>> WILL YOU REBUILD HERE?
>> NO, I'LL MOVE SOMEWHERE ELSE.
>> Ifill: SOME OF THOSE
RETURNING LIVED IN THE
WESTMOOR NEIGHBORHOOD.
IT LIES BETWEEN THE TWO
ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS THAT WERE
RAVAGED BY THE TORNADO--
BRIARWOOD AND PLAZA TOWERS.
NOW, CEILINGS AND ROOFS ARE
GONE, REPLACED WITH A VIEW OF
THE SKY, EVEN WHERE ROOMS ARE
STILL STANDING, THEIR CONTENTS
ARE AN UNRECOGNIZABLE MESS.
OUTSIDE, TREES THAT MANAGED TO
KEEP THEIR ROOTS ANCHORED, STAND
STRIPPED CLEAN OF THEIR BARK.
THOSE WHO USED TO LIVE THERE
SALVAGED WHATEVER THEY COULD
FROM THE WRECKAGE.
>> I'VE GOTTEN TO WHERE I JUST
HATE APRIL AND MAY BECAUSE OF
THE THREAT OF STORMS.
>> Ifill: JOAN AND CLAY GHRIST
WEREN'T AT HOME ON MONDAY, BUT
THEY CAME BACK TO PICK THROUGH
THE REMAINS OF THEIR HOME AND TO
BEGIN PLANNING THEIR FUTURE.
>> WE'LL COLLECT THE INSURANCE,
PAY OFF OUR NOTE, REBUILD
SOMETHING HERE, SELL IT AND BUY
A HOUSE IN SAN ANTONIO.
>> Ifill: ANOTHER WESTMOOR
COUPLE-- JIM AND BEVERLY
BRENNER-- RELIVED THE TERROR OF
MONDAY'S GIANT TWISTER.
>> THERE IS NOTHING THAT CAN
DESCRIBE THE SOUND OF YOUR HOUSE
EXPLODING WITH YOU IN IT.
>> Ifill: WHEN THE TORNADO HIT,
THE 81-YEAR-OLD BRENNER TOOK
SHELTER IN A CLOSET WITH HIS
WIFE.
BUT HE WAS SUCKED OUT BY THE
VORTEX.
>> I COULDN'T FIND MY HUSBAND.
I WAS YELLING HIS NAME AND HE
FINAL... FINALLY HE ANSWERED.
>> Ifill: THE HOME WAS
FLATTENED.
JIM BRENNER ENDED UP UNDER THE
ROOFTOP WITH ONLY MINOR
INJURIES.
>> I WAS OVER IN JAPAN WHEN THEY
DROPPED THE BOMB ON HIROSHIMA,
BELIEVE IT OR NOT, MOORE LOOKS
LIKE HIROSHIMA DID.
I CAN'T EVEN TALK ABOUT IT...
IT'S ALL FLAT AND OPEN IN EVERY
DIRECTION.
I CAN'T EVEN TALK ABOUT IT.
>> Ifill: FOR NOW, THE BRENNERS
ARE STAYING WITH A FRIEND AND
RECEIVING FOOD, SUPPLIES AND
HELP FROM THE OAKCREST CHURCH OF
CHRIST IN OKLAHOMA CITY.
PASTOR BEN GLOVER ORGANIZED A
FOOD AND WATER DRIVE FOR THE
AREA.
>> AFTER THE FIRST DAY, AFTER
THE DEER IN THE HEADLIGHTS, YOU
SEE THE REALITY SET IN.
THEY REALIZE THIS IS THE LONG
HAUL, IT'S NOT A SPRINT, IT'S A
MARATHON.
WE HELP THEM WITH DAY ONE, TWO,
THREE.
THESE ARE THE STEPS YOU NEED TO
TAKE.
>> Ifill: NOT FAR AWAY, MOORE'S
ONLY HOSPITAL IS IN RUINS, AFTER
TAKING A DIRECT HIT.
THE TOP FLOOR WAS RIPPED RIGHT
OFF THE BUILDING.
>> THIS WAS MY TRUCK, IT'S LIKE
MY PRIDE AND JOY.
>> Ifill: PHYSICAL THERAPY
ASSISTANT DEREK THAYER SPOTTED
THE SHINY HUB CAPS OF HIS TRUCK
WHEN HE EMERGED FROM THE
WRECKAGE OF THE MEDICAL CENTER.
HE HELPED SOME OF THE PATIENTS
GET TO SAFETY.
>> WE JUST HUNKERED DOWN AND
SOON AS IT CAME OVER YOU JUST
KNEW IT JUST FROM THE PRESSURE
CHANGE IN THE ROOM AND THEN IT
JUST BECAME A LITTLE MORE
CHAOTIC DUE TO THE PEOPLE COULD
TELL IT WAS GOING OVER, DOORS
WERE BEING RIPPED OFF THE DOOR
JAMS AND THINGS AND THAT'S WHEN
IT BECAME VERY REAL.
>> Ifill: THE STATE MEDICAL
EXAMINER TODAY RELEASED THE
NAMES OF SOME OF THE 24
KILLED.
AT LEAST TEN WERE CHILDREN, AND
SEVEN DIED WHEN THE TWISTER
STRUCK THE PLAZA TOWERS SCHOOL.
THE SCHOOLS HAD NO INTERNAL SAFE
ROOMS, BUT OKLAHOMA'S DIRECTOR
OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT SAYS
ALMOST NOTHING COULD HAVE
WITHSTOOD A DIRECT HIT FROM A
TORNADO WITH WINDS OVER 200
MILES-AN-HOUR.
>> THIS IS THE ANOMALY THAT
FLATTENS EVERYTHING TO THE
GROUND.
SO IT'S A BIT REMISS TO SAY
THAT... THAT TORNADO PRECAUTIONS
WERE NOT TAKEN OR THAT
FACILITIES WERE NOT STRONG
ENOUGH.
CAN THEY ALWAYS BE STRONGER?
ABSOLUTELY.
BUT I THINK EVERYTHING WAS DONE
THAT COULD BE DONE AT THE TIME.
>> Ifill: NOW, AS ATTENTION
TURNS TO RECONSTRUCTION, THERE'S
NEW FOCUS ON BUILDING SAFETY,
INCLUDING SAFE ROOMS IN HOMES--
CONCRETE BLOCKS IN THE FLOOR
WITH A SLIDING DOOR.
MOORE MAYOR GLENN LEWIS SAID
TODAY HE PLANS TO BUILD ONE.
>> IF YOU ASK MOST PEOPLE OUT
THERE, THEY'RE GOING TO REBUILD
AND THEY'RE PROBABLY GOING TO
GET A STORM SHELTER.
>> Ifill: IN THE MEANTIME,
RESCUE CREWS WERE WINDING DOWN
THEIR SEARCH OF THE WRECKAGE.
AND WHITE HOUSE OFFICIALS
ANNOUNCED PRESIDENT OBAMA PLANS
TO VISIT MOORE ON SUNDAY TO
SURVEY THE DAMAGE AND MEET WITH
VICTIMS.
>> Woodruff: AS OF THIS
AFTERNOON, OFFICIALS SAID SIX
ADULTS REMAIN UNACCOUNTED FOR.
FOR MORE ABOUT THE RECOVERY
EFFORTS IN THE AREA AND
QUESTIONS ARISING FROM THIS
DISASTER, I SPOKE WITH OKLAHOMA
GOVERNOR MARY FALLIN A SHORT
TIME AGO.
GOVERNOR MARY FALLIN,
THANK YOU FOR TALKING WITH US.
TELL US, HOW IS THE RECOVERY
GOING SO FAR NOW AFTER TWO DAYS?
>> THE RECOVERY IS MOVING RIGHT
ALONG.
WE HAVE BEGUN SOME OF THE
RECOVERY PROCESS OF CLEANING UP
THE DEBRIS WHEN I
CAME IN EARLY THIS MORNING, I
COULD SEE A CHANGE, AND THE
GROUND CONDITION, FROM THE
STANDPOINT THAT DEBRIS WAS
PUSHED OFF THE SIDE OF THE ROAD,
WAS BEING PILED UP IN DIFFERENT
AREAS ALONGSIDE THE ROAD ITSELF.
SO WE'RE MAKING GOOD PROGRESS.
AISE LOOK OVER HERE TO THE SIDE
I SEE ALL KINDS OF UTILITY
TRUCKS AND CONSTRUCTION TRUCKS
HERE IN THIS PARK LOT.
YOU SEE VARIOUS WORKERS AROUND
PICKING UP DEBRIS, AND EVEN
TRUCKS THAT SAY "CONSTRUCTION"
ON THEM.
SO WE'RE MAKING PROGRESS.
WE'VE ALSO LET THE FAMILIES GO
BACK INTO THEIR HOMES TO PICK UP
THEIR PERSONAL BELONGINGS, AND
HOPEFULLY THEY'LL BE ABLE TO
FIND SOME THINGS THEY CAN SAVE.
>> Woodruff: WHAT WOULD YOU
SAY ARE THE MAIN NEEDS THIS
COMMUNITY HAS RIGHT NOW?
>> LOTS OF PRAYER RIGHT NOW UPON
THE MAIN NEEDS ARE JUST HAVING A
WAY TO GET THE DIFFERENT
SERVICES THEY NEED.
AND WE HAVE FEMA HERE ON THE
SPOT THAT'S HELPING WITH
DISASTER RECOVERY AND HELPING
WITH FINDING SHELTER-- CERTAINLY
TEMPORARY SHELTER, FOR ALL THE
HOMES THAT WERE LOST.
A LOT OF PEOPLE LOST THEIR
CLOTHES AND SHOES AND FOOD, AND
SO AS I'VE GONE TO SOME OF THE
SHELTERS, THERE ARE LOTS OF
SHOES AND CLOTHES LAYING OUT.
THERE ARE PEOPLE WOMANING IN
PICKING THOSE UP.
PEOPLE LOST, LIKE, THEIR CELL
PHONES.
THEY LOST THEIR CARS, THEIR
PURSES, THEIR BILLFOLDS WHATEVER
IT MIGHT BE.
SO JUST PROVIDING THE NECESSARY
SERVICES SO PEOPLE CAN GO ABOUT
LIVING THEIR DAILY EXPLIEFS
HOPEFULLY SOME DAY GET BACK TO
WORK.
>> Woodruff: YOU MENTIONED
FEMA IS THERE.
OF COURSE PRESIDENT OBAMA IS
GOING TO BE COMING THERE ON
SUNDAY FOR A SERVICE.
IS THERE SOMETHING YOU'LL BE
ASKING HIM FOR?
>> HE IS GOING TO COME IN.
WE'RE NOT SURE WHAT TIME HE'S
COMING IN DURING THE DAY AND WE
DO HAVE A SERVICE AND WE'RE
WORKING ON THE TIME RIGHT NOW SO
IT DEPENDS ON HIS SCHEDULE AND
WHAT HE WOULD LIKE TO DO.
HE DID MENTION HE WOULD LIKE TO
SEE WHERE GROUND ZERO SPER SE,
AS FAR AS WHERE THE DISASTER HAS
OCCURRED AND THE SCHOOLS AND
SOME OF THE RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
I'M SURE HE MIGHT WANT TO SEE
SOME OF THE BUSINESS AREAS.
WE APPRECIATE HIM SIGNING OUR
EMERGENCY DECLARATION SO
QUICKLY, AND GLAD HE RECOGNIZES
THIS IS A MAJOR EVENT IN OUR
NATION.
>> Woodruff: GOVERNOR, IN
RETROSPECT, IT SHOULD THERE HAVE
BEEN MORE OF A STATE OR LOCAL
REQUIREMENT FOR SAFE SHELTER,
ESPECIALLY IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS
LIKE THE SCHOOL AND THE
HOSPITALS?
>> WELL, THE ONE THING ABOUT OUR
STATE, WE ACTUALLY STARTED A
REBATE PROGRAM MANY YEARS AGO
AFTER WE HAD A TORNADO THAT CAME
THROUGH IN 1999, IN WHICH WE
NISHTD A REBATE MATCHING FEDERAL
FEMA MONEY THAT WE WOULD GIVE
GRANTSUTE TO PEOPLE WHO COULD
APPLY FOR THOSE AND THEY HAD TO
MAKE APPLICATION FOR THAT TO PUT
IN A SHELTER FOR THEIR HOME OR
SCHOOL OR BUSINESSES AND OF
COURSE THAT IS SOMETHING WE
WOULD ENCOURAGE PEOPLE TO DO.
AND I DO KNOW THAT SINCE NEW
STRUCTURES HAVE BEEN BUILT,
WHETHER IT'S HOMES OR WHETHER
IT'S BEEN SCHOOLS, MANY OF THEM
HAVE CHOSEN TO PUT SHELTERS IN.
NOW, WHAT HAPPENED HERE THIS
PAST WEEK IS NOT SOMETHING THAT
HAPPENS EVERY DAY IN OUR STATE.
IT'S USUALLY ABOUT 1% OF
TORNADOES THAT COME THROUGH IN
ANY SEASON WOULD BE AN F-5
TORNADO.
SO MOST TORNADOES ARE NOT OF
THIS DEGREE, AND THERE ARE
CERTAINLY SAFETY PRECAUTIONS
THAT THE SCHOOL TOOK, AND IT'S
TERRIBLE THAT WE LOST 24 PEOPLE
BUT IT'S ALSO REMARKABLE THAT WE
ONLY LOST 24 PEOPLE WITH THIS
KIND OF DESTRUCTION.
>> Woodruff: BUT SHOULDN'T
PUBLIC, ESPECIALLY PUBLIC
BUILDINGS LIKE SCHOOLS AND
HOSPITALS, BE REQUIRED TO HAVE A
SAFE SHELTER?
>> WELL, THAT'S SOMETHING THAT
WE'LL BE DISCUSSING THIS YEAR.
AND CERTAINLY SOMETHING THAT
WE'LL WANT INPUT FROM, FROM THE
COMMUNITY ITSELF, FROM THE
LEGISLATURE.
IT'S-- IT'S ALSO AN ISSUE THAT
WILL REQUIRE LOOKING AT THE
BUILDING CODE THEMSELVES AND
WORKING WITH THE LOCAL CITIES.
BUT WE DO THINK WE NEED TO HAVE
A DISCUSSION ABOUT THAT.
>> Woodruff: DO YOU THINK IT'S
A GOOD IDEA?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
I THINK IT'S A GOOD IDEA THAT
PEOPLE SHOULD LOOK AT THE
POSSIBILITY OF PUTTING IN STORM
SHELTERS.
I WON'T GO AS FAR AS SAYING WE
SHOULD MANDATE THAT, BUT I THINK
WE SHOULD MAKE IT AS EASY AS
POSSIBLE TO BE ABLE TO DO THAT.
I WAS VISITING WITH OUR
EMERGENCY INDEPENDENT DIRECTOR
AND OUR FEMA REPRESENTATIVE FROM
THIS REGION AND FEMA TOLD ME
THEY HAVE SPENT $57 MILLION OVER
THE LAST DECADE PUTTING IN STORM
SHELTERS THROUGHOUT OKLAHOMA,
BOTH IN INDIVIDUAL HOMES AND
BUSINESS AND SCHOOLS.
THAT IS A LARGE SUM OF MONEY.
>> Woodruff: AND IT DOES SOUND
LIKE A LOT OF THAT HAS BEEN DONE
BUT I'M JUST CURIOUS WHY YOU
THINK IT SHOULD NOT BE MANDATED.
>> WELL, IT DEPEND ON IF A
SCHOOL DISTRICT CAN AFFORD IT,
FRANKLY.
THE SCHOOL SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL BS
THEMSELVES HAVE TO PASS BOND
TOOSHZ BUILD SCHOOLS AND THERE
ARE INDIVIDUALS IN THIS
PARTICULAR NEIGHBORHOOD THAT WAS
HIT IS THAT MAY NOT BE ABLE TO
AFFORD A $2,000, $3,000 INCREASE
IN THE CONSTRUCTION OF THEIR
HOME OR PUTTING IN A SHELTER IN
THEIR HOME.
WE CERTAINLY WOULD ENCOURAGE
PEOPLE TO DO THAT AND WE CAN
LOOK AT WAYS, SUCHEDZ ADD OUR
ARE BAIT PROGRAM, TO MAKE IT
FINANCIALLY MORE ABLE TO BE ABLE
TO REACH THE GOAL OF PUTTING IT
IN THE HOMES, SHELTERS INTO
THEIR HOMES.
BUT, YOU KNOW, I THINK THAT'S
GOING TO BE UP TO THE
INDIVIDUAL, CERTAINLY UPON THEIR
BUDGET AND CERTAINLY WE HAVE TO
TAKE INTO CONSIDERATION THE
STATE'S BUDGET.
>> Woodruff: WHAT OTHER
LESSONS WOULD YOU SAY, GOVERNOR,
COME OUT OF THIS EXPERIENCE?
>> THAT INFORMATION IS KEY, THAT
HITTING THE GROUND RUNNING VERY,
VERY QUICKLY IS IMPORTANT TO
SAVING LIVES, AND WE DID TO
THAT.
THE MINUTE I SAW THE TORNADO ON
TELEVISION STRIKING THIS
PARTICULAR AREA AND SAW HOW
LARGE IT WAS, I CALLED OURADJUNE
NEEDED TO BE READY WITH OUR
NATIONAL GUARD TO HAVE SEARCH
ANSEARCH-AND-RESCUE TEAMS AND DS
TO GO THROUGH THE DEBRIS TO HELP
LOCATE ANY SURVIVORS THAT MAY BE
AROUND.
WE COORDINATED WITH OUR HIGHWAY
PATROL, PUBLIC SAFETY, CERTAINLY
REACHED OUT TO THE COMMUNITIES
AND MAYORS AND SHERIFFS AND
POLICE DEPARTMENTS AND FIRE TO
DO EVERYTHING WE COULD TO HAVE
GOOD COLLABORATION.
THAT'S ONE OF THE THINGS I'VE
LEARNED OVER THE MANY YEARS
WE'VE HAD DISASTERS LIKE THIS IS
THAT THE LOCAL PEOPLE, THE STATE
PEOPLE, AND THE FEDERAL PEOPLE
ALL HAVE TO TALK AND WORK
TOGETHER OR THINGS JUST DON'T
WORK WELL.
>> Woodruff: WELL, GOVERNOR,
WE WISH YOU THE VERY BEST WITH
ALL THE RECOVERY GOING FORWARD.
AND, OF COURSE, OUR HEARTS AND
PRAYERS ARE WITH THOSE WHO WERE
INJURED AND THOSE FAMILIES WHO
LOST LOVED ONES.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> WE APPRECIATE YOU, JUDY.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> Ifill: ONLINE, RESIDENTS OF
JOPLIN, MISSOURI, ARE
REMEMBERING THEIR OWN TORNADO
TRAGEDY, WHICH HAPPENED TWO
YEARS AGO TODAY, AND PITCHING IN
TO HELP VICTIMS IN OKLAHOMA.
STILL TO COME ON THE "NEWSHOUR":
THE TAX LAWS BEHIND THE I.R.S.
CONTROVERSY; INSIDE THE GARMENT
FACTORIES OF BANGLADESH; A NEW
SERIES ON THE ISSUES AT STAKE
FOR IMMIGRATION REFORM AND THE
HOUSTON GRAND OPERA SINGS A
DIFFERENT SONG.
BUT FIRST,  WITH THE OTHER NEWS
OF THE DAY.
HERE'S HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> FOR THE FIRST TIME THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION HAS ACKNOWLEDGED
KILLING FOUR AMERICAN CITIZENS
IN DRONE STRIKES SINCE NOW 2009.
ATTORNEY GENERAL ERIC HOLDER
INFORMED CONGRESS TODAY.
HOLDER SAID ONE OF THE FOUR,
RADICAL MUSLIM CLERIC AL-AWLAKI,
WAS DIRECTLY TARGETED INIEM NEN
2011.
THE OTHER THREE, INCLUDING
AL-AWLAKI'S TEENAGED SON WERE
NOT TARGETED.
A MAN BEING QUESTIONED IN THE
BOSTON BOMBING INVESTIGATION WAS
SHOT AND KILLED EARLY TODAY, AT
HIS HOME IN ORLANDO, FLORIDA.
THE F.B.I. SAID 27-YEAR-OLD
IBRAGIM TODASHEV WAS FIRED ON
WHEN HE LUNGED AT AN AGENT WITH
A KNIFE, DURING A MEETING IN HIS
HOME.
TWO STATE TROOPERS FROM
MASSACHUSETTS WERE ALSO THERE.
THE BUREAU DID NOT SAY WHY THE
MAN WAS BEING QUESTIONED.
BUT FORMER ROOMMATES SAID
TODASHEV KNEW TAMERLAN TSARNAEV,
THE BOMBING SUSPECT WHO DIED IN
A SHOOTOUT WITH BOSTON POLICE
LAST MONTH.
THE U.S. AND ARAB AND EUROPEAN
NATIONS WILL STEP UP SUPPORT FOR
THE REBELS IN SYRIA, IF
PRESIDENT BASHAR AL ASSAD
REJECTS PEACE TALKS.
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY
ISSUED THAT WARNING TODAY AT A
FRIENDS OF SYRIA MEETING IN
JORDAN.
HE SAID ASSAD'S FORCES MAY HAVE
GAINED SOME GROUND LATELY, BUT
THAT IT IS ONLY TEMPORARY.
>> IN THE END, I DON'T BELIEVE
THERE IS A... THERE'S A, YOU
KNOW, MILITARY VICTORY FOR ASSAD
THAT IS GOING SOMEHOW JUSTIFY
THE GAINS HE HAS MADE IN THE
LAST DAYS.
WHAT I DO THINK IS THAT HE WILL
ULTIMATELY REALIZE, AS WILL
THOSE SUPPORTING HIM, THAT THIS
SITUATION IS GOING TO GET MORE
DANGEROUS, MORE DESTRUCTIVE, AND
MUCH MORE DAMAGING TO THE
PROSPECTS OF THE REGION.
>> Sreenivasan: MEANWHILE, THE
BATTLE FOR THE SYRIAN BORDER
TOWN OF QUSAIR MOVED INTO ITS
FOURTH DAY.
REBELS FIGHTING TO HOLD THE TOWN
APPEALED FOR REINFORCEMENTS FROM
ACROSS SYRIA.
THERE WAS MORE TODAY ON THE
C.I.A.'S INVOLVEMENT IN
EXPLAINING THE ATTACK ON A
U.S. POST IN BENGHAZI, LIBYA.
"THE WASHINGTON POST" REPORTED
THAT THEN-DIRECTOR DAVID
PETRAEUS PLAYED A KEY ROLE IN
DRAFTING TALKING POINTS ON
BENGHAZI.
PETRAEUS WANTED TO INCLUDE
EARLIER WARNINGS ABOUT POSSIBLE
ATTACKS, AND MENTION A GROUP
WITH AL-QAEDA LINKS.
THE FINAL VERSION DELETED THOSE
REFERENCES, AND REPUBLICANS
CLAIMED A COVERUP-- A CHARGE THE
WHITE HOUSE DENIES.
THE SCHOOL BOARD IN CHICAGO IS
GOING AHEAD WITH A MUCH-DEBATED
PLAN TO CLOSE 50 PUBLIC SCHOOLS
AND PROGRAMS.
THE PLAN WAS ADOPTED TODAY, WITH
SUPPORTERS CITING FALLING
ENROLLMENT, A GROWING BUDGET
DEFICIT AND POOR SCHOOL
PERFORMANCE.
OPPONENTS SAID THE CLOSINGS
TARGET TOO MANY MINORITY
NEIGHBORHOODS AND WILL FORCE
CHILDREN TO CROSS GANG
BOUNDARIES TO GET TO A NEW
SCHOOL.
THE NEW MAYOR OF LOS ANGELES
WILL BE ERIC GARCETTI.
THE CITY COUNCILMAN WON 54% OF
THE VOTE IN YESTERDAY'S RUN-OFF
WITH FELLOW DEMOCRAT AND CITY
CONTROLLER WENDY GREUEL.
THEY WERE THE TOP TWO VOTE-
GETTERS IN A MARCH PRIMARY.
GARCETTI CLAIMED VICTORY, VOWING
TO KEEP HIS PROMISES TO CLEAN UP
THE CITY AND BOOST THE ECONOMY.
>> ON JULY 1, WE WILL ASSUME THE
RESPONSIBILITY OF CREATING JOBS,
OF BALANCING OUR CITY'S BUDGET,
OF KEEPING OUR CITY'S STREETS
SAFE AND IMPROVING THE QUALITY
OF LIFE FOR ALL ANGELENOS.
>> Sreenivasan: GARCETTI WILL BE
THE FIRST JEWISH MAYOR OF LOS
ANGELES.
HE SUCCEEDS ANTONIO
VILLARAIGOSA, WHO SERVED TWO
TERMS.
IN ECONOMIC NEWS, FEDERAL
RESERVE CHAIR BEN BERNANKE SAID
TODAY THE CENTRAL BANK HAS NO
PLANS TO END ITS STIMULUS
PROGRAM.
THE FED HAS KEPT LONG-TERM
INTEREST RATES AT RECORD LOWS,
AND BERNANKE TOLD A
CONGRESSIONAL HEARING THAT THE
JOB MARKET IS STILL TOO WEAK TO
START PUSHING RATES HIGHER.
>> A PREMATURE TIGHTENING OF
MONETARY POLICY COULD LEAD
INTEREST RATES TO RISE
TEMPORARILY BUT WOULD ALSO CARRY
A SUBSTANTIAL RISK OF SLOWING OR
ENDING THE ECONOMIC RECOVERY AND
CAUSING INFLATION TO FALL
FURTHER.
MOREOVER, RENEWED ECONOMIC
WEAKNESS WOULD POSE ITS OWN
RISKS TO FINANCIAL STABILITY.
>> Sreenivasan: BERNANKE'S
TESTIMONY INITIALLY BOOSTED
WALL STREET, BUT STOCKS FELL
LATER, AFTER REPORTS THAT
SEVERAL POLICY MAKERS DO WANT TO
DOWNSIZE THE STIMULUS EFFORT.
IN THE END, THE DOW JONES
INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE LOST 80
POINTS TO CLOSE AT 15,307.
THE NASDAQ FELL MORE THAN 38
POINTS TO CLOSE AT 3,463.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
MAJOR STORIES.
NOW, BACK TO JUDY.
>> Woodruff: WE TURN TO
FIREWORKS ON CAPITOL HILL TODAY
DURING THE CONTINUING PROBE INTO
HOW THE I.R.S. SCRUTINIZED
CONSERVATIVE GROUPS ASKING FOR
TAX-EXEMPT STATUS.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS OUR STORY.
>> I HAVE NOT DONE ANYTHING
WRONG.
I HAVE NOT BROKEN ANY LAWS.
I HAVE NOT VIOLATED ANY I.R.S.
RULES OR REGULATIONS.
AND I HAVE NOT PROVIDED FALSE
INFORMATION TO THIS OR ANY OTHER
CONGRESSIONAL COMMITTEE.
>> Brown: THAT DRAMATIC DEFENSE
CAME FROM LOIS LERNER AT THE
OUTSET OF THE HEARING.
SHE OVERSEES THE I.R.S.
DEPARTMENT THAT PROCESSES TAX-
EXEMPT APPLICATIONS.
BUT HAVING DELIVERED HER BRIEF
STATEMENT, LERNER REFUSED TO
ANSWER ANY QUESTIONS FROM THE
COMMITTEE.
>> BECAUSE I'M ASSERTING MY
RIGHT NOT TO TESTIFY I KNOW THAT
SOME PEOPLE WILL ASSUME THAT
I'VE DONE SOMETHING WRONG.
I HAVE NOT.
ONE OF THE BASIC FUNCTIONS OF
THE FIFTH AMENDMENT IS TO
PROTECT INNOCENT INDIVIDUALS,
AND THAT IS THE PROTECTION I'M
INVOKING TODAY.
>> Brown: LERNER'S LAWYER HAD
NOTIFIED THE COMMITTEE IN
ADVANCE THAT SHE WOULD TAKE THE
FIFTH, BUT SOUTH CAROLINA
REPUBLICAN TREY GOWDY WAS
VISIBLY AGITATED.
>> YOU DON'T GET TO TELL YOUR
SIDE OF THE STORY AND THEN NOT
BE SUBJECTED TO CROSS
EXAMINATION.
THAT'S NOT THE WAY IT WORKS.
SHE WAIVED HER RIGHT TO FIFTH
AMENDMENT PRIVILEGE BY ISSUING
AN OPENING STATEMENT AND SHE
OUGHT TO STAND HERE AND ANSWER
OUR QUESTIONS.
>> Brown: THE CHAIR OF THE
OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE, CALIFORNIA
REPUBLICAN DARRELL ISSA, ASKED
LERNER TO RECONSIDER.
>> IS IT POSSIBLE THAT WE COULD
NARROW SCOPE OF QUESTIONS AND
THAT THERE ARE SOME AREAS THAT
YOU WOULD BE ABLE TO ANSWER ANY
QUESTIONS ON HERE TODAY?
>> I WILL NOT ANSWER ANY
QUESTIONS OR TESTIFY TODAY.
>> MS. LERNER, WOULD YOU BE
WILLING TO ANSWER QUESTIONS
SPECIFICALLY RELATED TO
STATEMENTS MADE UNDER OATH TO
THIS COMMITTEE?
>> I DECLINE TO ANSWER THAT
QUESTION FOR THE REASONS I'VE
ALREADY GIVEN.
>> Brown: EVEN BEFORE LERNER
SPOKE, COMMITTEE DEMOCRAT
STEPHEN LYNCH OF MASSACHUSETTS
WARNED AGAINST REFUSING TO
TESTIFY.
>> WE KNOW WHERE THAT WILL LEAD.
IT WILL LEAD TO A SPECIAL
PROSECUTOR.
IT WILL LEAD TO SPECIAL COUNSEL
BEING APPOINTED TO GET TO THE
BOTTOM OF THIS.
SO I HOPE THAT'S NOT THE
APPROACH OF THE I.R.S. GOING
FORWARD, BECAUSE THERE WILL BE
HELL TO PAY IF THAT'S THE ROUTE
THAT WE CHOOSE TO GO DOWN.
>> Brown: ULTIMATELY, ISSA
EXCUSED LERNER, BUT SAID SHE
MIGHT BE RECALLED IF THE
COMMITTEE FINDS SHE DID NOT
PROPERLY INVOKE HER FIFTH
AMENDMENT RIGHT.
WITH THAT, THE FOCUS SHIFTED TO
FORMER I.R.S. COMMISSIONER
DOUGLAS SHULMAN.
HE LED THE AGENCY AT THE TIME
THAT EMPLOYEES WERE SINGLING OUT
CONSERVATIVE GROUPS THAT APPLIED
FOR TAX-EXEMPT STATUS.
SHULMAN ACKNOWLEDGED YESTERDAY
THAT HE LEARNED OF THE PRACTICE
A YEAR AGO, TWO MONTHS AFTER HE
TOLD CONGRESS THERE WAS
ABSOLUTELY NO TARGETING.
MARYLAND DEMOCRAT ELIJAH
CUMMINGS PRESSED TODAY FOR AN
EXPLANATION.
>> IT SEEMS TO ME IF YOU SAY TO
THE CONGRESS, ABSOLUTELY NOT,
ABSOLUTELY NO TARGETING, IT
SEEMS TO ME THAT YOU WOULD COME
BACK, EVEN IF IT WAS A PHONE
CALL OR A LETTER, OR SOMETHING.
COMMON SENSE, I MEAN A
REASONABLE PERSON WOULD EXPECT
YOU AS THE HEAD OF THE I.R.S.,
COMMUNICATING WITH CONGRESS, TO
COME BACK AND DO THAT.
YOU DIDN'T FEEL THAT WAY THOUGH?
>> I MEAN, I GUESS I WOULD
REPEAT, IN MARCH...
(CROSSTALK)
>> I DON'T WANT YOU TO REPEAT.
I JUST-- I TAKE IT YOU DISAGREE
WITH WHAT I JUST SAID?
>> UM... AT THE TIME I LEARNED
ABOUT THIS LIST I FELT I WAS
TAKING THE APPROPRIATE ACTIONS
AND THAT MY COURSE WAS THE
PROPER ONE.
AND I STILL FEEL THAT WAY TODAY.
>> I'M SORRY, THAT'S SIMPLY NOT
GOOD ENOUGH.
IT'S SIMPLY NOT GOOD ENOUGH, MR.
SHULMAN.
>> Brown: EVEN J. RUSSELL
GEORGE-- THE TREASURY INSPECTOR
GENERAL WHO REPORTED ON THE
I.R.S. TARGETING-- CAME IN FOR
CRITICISM.
CHAIRMAN ISSA ARGUED GEORGE
SHOULD HAVE ALERTED CONGRESS OF
HIS FINDINGS SOONER.
GEORGE DEFENDED HIMSELF, SAYING
HE WAS FOLLOWING ESTABLISHED
PROCEDURES.
>> TO ENSURE FAIRNESS AND TO
ENSURE THAT WE ARE COMPLETELY
ACCURATE WITH THE INFORMATION
THAT WE RELAY TO CONGRESS, WE
WILL NOT REPORT INFORMATION
UNTIL THE I.R.S. HAS HAD AN
OPPORTUNITY TO TAKE A LOOK AT IT
TO ENSURE THAT WE'RE NOT
MISSTATING THE FACTS.
>> MR. GEORGE, THAT IS NOT THE
STATUTE.
THAT IS NOT THE STATUTE.
THIS COMMITTEE LAST AUGUST MADE
IT VERY CLEAR THAT THE STATUTE
AS WRITTEN DOES NOT GIVE YOU THE
ABILITY, OR ANY I.G., TO USE US
AS A WHIPPING BOY WHEN YOU WANT
DARK UNTIL AN INVESTIGATION IS
COMPLETED.
>> Brown: THE COMMITTEE ALSO
HEARD FROM DEPUTY TREASURY
SECRETARY NEAL WOLIN.
HE SAID WHAT HAPPENED AT THE
I.R.S. WAS INEXCUSABLE, BUT NO
TODAY'S HEARING CAME TO AN END
AFTER SIX HOURS, BUT THERE'S IS
NO END IN SIGHT TO THE THREE
CONGRESSIONAL INVESTIGATIONS
UNDER WAY.
MORE HEARINGS ARE EXPECTED AFTER
THE MEMORIAL DAY RECESS.
EVEN AS THESE HEARINGS UNFOLD TO
FIND OUT EXACTLY WHAT HAPPENED
AT THE I.R.S., THERE'S
CONTINUING CONFUSION ABOUT THE
TAX LAWS AND REGULATIONS AT THE
HEART OF THE MATTER:
WHO QUALIFIES FOR TAX-EXEMPT
STATUS?
HOW IS THAT DETERMINED?
AND OTHER QUESTIONS WE'LL TRY TO
GET AT NOW WITH DUKE UNIVERSITY
LAW SCHOOL PROFESSOR RICHARD
SCHMALBECK.
HE'S A FORMER TAX ATTORNEY
AND KIM BARKER.
SHE'S A REPORTER WITH PRO
PUBLICA.
AT THE HISTORY.
SO TAKE US BACK.
HOW DID IT COME TO BE THAT
GROUPS CAN SEEK TAX-EXEMPT
STATUS IN THE FIRST PLACE?
>> IT'S A VERY GOOD QUESTION,
AND NOBODY IS ENTIRELY SURE EVEN
HOW SOCIAL WELFARE NONPROFITS
CAME ABOUT IN THE FIRST PLACE.
ALL WE KNOW IS THAT AS PAROF THE
REVENUE ACT OF 1913, CONGRESS
CREATED THE IDEA OF SOCIAL
WELFARE NONPROFITS.
EVENTUALLY, THEY WERE DEFINED AS
BEING FORMED EXCLUSIVELY TO
PROMOTE SOCIAL WELFARE, AND THEN
OVER THE YEARS, THAT WAS-- THAT
"EXCLUSIVELY" WAS DEFINED TO
MEAN THAT YOU SHOULD HAVE A
PRIMARY PURPOSE AS BEING A
SOCIAL WELFARE NONPROFIT.
SO THERE'S THIS BIG DEBATE OVER
"EXCLUSIVELY" VERSUS "PRIMARY."
IN THE 80s IT CAME ABOUT THAT
THESE GROUPS STARTED TO
INTERPRET "PRIMARY" TO MEAN THEY
COULD ACTUALLY SPEND MONEY ON
POLITICS AND THE I.R.S. HAS
AGREED WITH THAT.
THE REAL ARGUMENT HERE IS OVER
DISCLOSE THE DONORS FOR THE
MONEY THAT THEY'RE SPENDING ON
POLITICS AND ON THESE POLITICAL
ADS THAT ARE THEN REPORTED TO
THE F.E.C.
>> STAY WITH THIS, RICHARD
SCHMALBECK, ABOUT DEFINING THIS
LINE BETWEEN SOCIAL WELFARE AND
POLITICS.
HELP US UNDERSTAND MORE.
>> I WISH I COULD BE--
>> Brown: HOLD ON--
>> MORE DEFINITIVE.
>> Brown: LET ME ASK OUR OUR
OTHER GUEST HERE.
>> THERE ARE REALLY THREE TYPES
OF ORGANIZATIONS THAT ARE
INVOLVED IN THIS DISPUTE, AND I
THINK IT WOULD BE HELPFUL TO
EXPLAIN A LITTLE BIT THE LARGEST
CATEGORY OF EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS
ARE ACTUALLY 501-C-3
ORGANIZATIONS, THOSE ARE THE
ONES THAT PURSUE EDUCATIONAL,
RELIGIOUS, OR CHARITABLE
PURPOSES AND THOSE ARE THE ONES
THAT GET THE MAJOR TAX BENEFITS
AND THE BIG TAX BENEFIT ON THE
TABLE HERE IS WHETHER DONORS CAN
DEDUCT THEIR CONTRIBUTIONS.
THEY CAN TO EDUCATIONAL AND
CHARITY AND RELIGIOUS BUT THEY
CAN'T TO THE OTHER GROUPS AND
THERE ARE TWO DOZEN OTHER TYPES
OF CATEGORIES OF GROUPS.
THE TROUBLE WITH THE C-3,
EVERYBODY WOULD LIKE THAT
DEDUCTION, BUT THEY CANNOT
ENGAGE IN ANY SUBSTANTIAL
LOBBYING AND THEY'RE NOT
SUPPOSED TO DO ANY POLITICAL
CAMPAIGNING AT ALL.
NOW, A LOT OF C-4 ORGANIZATIONS
ACTUALLY MIGHT QUALIFY IN TERMS
OF CHARITABLE PURPOSES THAT THEY
SERVE, PUT THEY WANT TO DO
LOBBYING.
THAT IS PART OF THEIR FUNCTION
AS THEY SEE IT, AND THEY CAN DO
LOBBYING AS A CAN C-4
ORGANIZATION IN ANY AMOUNT.
AND AS THE OTHER GUEST
INDICATED, THEY ARE ALLOWED TO
DO SOME POLITICAL PARTICIPATION
IN ACTUAL PARTISAN CAMPAIGNS AS
LONG AS IT'S NOT THEIR PRIMARY
PURPOSE.
AND THE I.R.S. HAS TRADITIONALLY
UNDERSTOOD THAT TO MEAN AS LONG
AS IT'S LESS THAN HALF.
>> Brown: LESS THAN HALF.
KIM BARKER, GROUPS CAN DEFINE
THEMSELVESES AND PROCEED IN
THEIR WORK?
THAT'S ALSO PART OF WHAT
HAPPENS, RIGHT?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
YOU DON'T EVEN HAVE TO APPLY TO
THE I.R.S. FOR RECOGNITION AS A
SOCIAL WELFARE NONPROFIT TO
OPERATE.
YOU CAN IN EFFECT GO OUT
TOMORROW, INCORPORATE YOUR OWN
SOCIAL WELFARE NONPROFIT, SAID
SAI IT'S LIKE VALUES FOR A
BETTER AMERICA, START RAISING
MONEY, SPEND SOME MONEY ON AN
ELECTION, AND THEN YOU CAN FOLD
UP BEFORE YOUR FIRST TAX RETURN
IS EVEN DUE.
SO IN MANY WAYS, THE I.R.S.
CAN'T EVEN MATCH THE SPEED OF
POLITICS.
AND THAT'S SOMETHING I THINK
THAT'S GOTTEN LOST IN THIS
DEBATE IS WHY ARE WE EVEN
TALKING ABOUT THE I.R.S.
MONITORING THE POLITICAL
SPENDING OF THESE GROUPS WHEN
THE F.E.C. IS, THEORETICALLY,
SUPPOSED TO BE THE AGENCY THAT'S
MONITORING POLITICAL SPENDING?
>> Brown: WELL, RICHARD
SCHMALBECK, DO YOU HAVE AN
ANSWER FOR THAT OR IS THAT JUST
HOW THE SYSTEM HAS EVOLVED?
WHY IS THE I.R.S. THE ONE
LOOKING AT IT?
>> WELL, IT IS PART OF THE
INTERNAL REVENUE CODE, SO THEY
ARE THE ENFORCERS IN CHIEF AS TO
501-C-3, 501-C-4s, BUT THEY DO
HAVE A JOINT JURISDICTION WITH
THE FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION
AS TO POLITICAL CAMPAIGN
ACTIVITIES.
>> Announcer: LET ME STAY WITH
YOU ON THIS QUESTION RAISED
EARLIER ABOUT THE
CONFIDENTIALITY OF 501-C-4s.
WHAT'S THE HISTORY BEHIND THAT?
THAT GOES BACK TO THE 1950s, I
UNDERSTAND.
>> YOU KNOW, THE HISTORY IS
MURKY.
I THINK IT PROBABLY HAS TO DO
WITH THE FACT THAT C-3s, THE
CHARITABLE-TYPE OF ORGANIZATION,
HAS LONG WANTED TO PROTECT ITS
DONOR LISTS.
A LOT OF DONORS LIKE TO MAKE
THEIR GIFTS ANONYMOUSLY.
THEY DON'T WANT TO BE APPROACHED
BY PEOPLE JUST BECAUSE THEY ARE
KNOWN TO BE GENEROUS IN THEIR
FLP.
SO-- FILL ANTHROPEE.
C-3s HAVE ALWAYS BEEN
CONFIDENTIAL.
EVEN POLITICAL GROUPS UNDER 527
HAVE BEEN ABLE TO KEEP THEIR
DONORS CONFIDENTIAL UNTIL 2000,
AND THEN CONGRESS CHANGED THAT.
AND, REALLY, THERE'S PROBABLY
NOT A STRONG ARGUMENT THAT
SUGGESTS THAT C-4 ORGANIZATIONS
AND 527 POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS
OUGHT TO BE TREATED DIFFERENTLY
ON THIS CONFIDENTIALITY ISSUE.
AND IF THEY WERE TREATEDLY THE
SAME, THEN ORGANIZATIONS WOULD
NOT PARTICULARLY SEEK TO BE
C-4s IF THEY WERE GOING TO DO
A LOT OF POLITICS, AND THIS
ISSUE WOULD NEVER EVEN HAVE COME
UP.
>> Brown: COME BACKER, ANOTHER
THING THAT HAS BEEN TALKED ABOUT
MUCH IN THE LAST COUPLE OF WEEKS
IS NOTING THAT THE GROUPS
INVOLVED IN THE CURRENT
SITUATION ARE OFTEN RELATIVELY
SMALL PLAYERS AND A LOT OF THE
MUCH LARGER PLAYERS ON BOTH THE
RIGHT AND LEFT DID NOT FALL INTO
THESE CATEGORIES OR WERE NOT
RECEIVING THE SAME SORT OF
SCRUTINY.
NOW, DOES ANYBODY KNOW WHY THAT
IS?
>> WE DON'T REALLY KNOW THE FULL
EXTENT OF WHAT THE INSPECTOR
GENERAL IS DOING IN TERMS OF AN
INVESTIGATION INTO SOCIAL
WELFARES, NONPROFITS ACTIVITY AS
MONITORED BY THE I.R.S.
WE KNOW THAT THEY'RE TAKING A
LOOK AT WHAT THE I.R.S. HAS DONE
ON OTHER SOCIAL WELFARE
NONPROFITS INVOLVED IN POLITICS,
BUT THE FULL COURSE OF WHAT THE
I.R.S. WAS DOING, WHETHER IT WAS
ACTUALLY TARGETING OTHER GROUPED
ABOUTS THE TEA PARTY AND PATRIOT
GROUPS.
WE DON'T KNOW.
BECAUSE THE INSPECTOR GENERAL'S
REPORT WAS VERY LIMITED IN
LOOKING AT WHETHER THESE
ALLEGATIONS OF TEA PARTY
TARGETING WAS TRUE.
I THINK THERE ARE TWO POINTS
HERE THAT FOLKS HAVE BEEN
POINTING TOUT ME IN THE LAST
COUPLE OF WEEKS.
NUMBER ONE WAS WHAT YOU MENTION,
THE FACT THAT THE I.R.S. WAS
FLAGGING THESE GROUPS, LIKE THE
TEA PARTY, THAT WEREN'T DOING
MUCH IN THE WAY OF POLITICAL
SPENDING AT ALL.
I MEAN, BASICALLY NONE AT THE
FEDERAL LEVEL.
AND SOME AT THE STATE LEVEL.
AND THAT THEY-- AT LEAST
ACCORDING TO THIS AUDIT, THEY
DON'T SEEM TO BE LOOKING AT ALL
AT THE MAJOR PLAYERS, SUCH AS
CROSSROADS G.P.S., WHICH SAY
SOCIAL WELFARE NONPROFIT FOUNDED
IN PART BY KARL ROVE, THE G.O.P.
STRATEGIST, WHICH SPENT MORE
THAN $71 MILLION ON THE
ELECTIONS LAST YEAR WITHOUT
HAVING TO REPORT ITS DONORS.
>> Brown: LET ME JUST ASK
RICHARD SCHMALBECK VERY BRIEFLY
ARE, THERE PEOPLE LOOKING AT ALL
THIS TO KIND OF FIX THE SYSTEM
OR CLARIFY THE SYSTEM?
>> WELL, THERE'S QUITE A BIT
THAT COULD BE DONE TO FIX OR
CLARIFY THE SYSTEM, BUT A LOT OF
PROBLEM IS THE APPROPRIATIONS
FOR THE I.R.S. HAVE BEEN
ACTUALLY DECLINING IN REAL TERMS
IN RECENT YEARS EVEN AS THEIR
DUTIES HAVE INCREASED SO THEY
DON'T HAVE ENOUGH MONEY TO
PROVIDE THE RIGHT KIND OF
GUIDANCE.
THEY DON'T HAVE ENOUGH MONEY TO
PROVIDE THE RIGHT KIND OF
TRAINING.
THEY DON'T HAVE ENOUGH MONEY TO
PROVIDE THE RIGHT KIND OF STAFF.
AND THEY DON'T HAVE THE MONEY TO
PROVIDE MIDDLE-MANAGEMENT REVIEW
THAT WOULD RESULT IN MORE CINS
NET PROCESSING OF THESE
APPLICATIONS.
>> Brown: WE'LL LEAVE IT THERE
FOR NOW.
RICHARD SCHMALBECK, KIM BARKER,
THANK U VEYORY MUCH.
>> Ifill: THE COLLAPSE OF A
GARMENT FACTORY IN BANGLADESH
LAST MONTH HAS RAISED QUESTIONS
ABOUT WHAT RESPONSIBILITY
INTERNATIONAL COMPANIES,
INCLUDING WALMART AND THE GAP IN
THE U.S. AND PRIMARK AND PREMIER
IN THE U.K., HAVE TO VICTIMS AND
THEIR FAMILIES.
LAURA KUENSSBERG OF "INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS" HAS THAT STORY.
>> Reporter: THEY CAME NOT IN
HOPE OF FINDING THEIR LOVED
ONES.
THEY KNOW THEY ARE GONE UNDER
THE FACTORY'S RUBBLE.
BUT THEY COME IN EACH DAY STILL
IN HOPE OF HELP THAT COMPANIES
WHO PROMISED SUPPORT WILL DO AS
THEY SAID.
BUT NEARLY A MONTH ON, NOTHING
HAS COME.
HER GRANDDAUGHTER KANCHUN MALA
WAS 15.
UNDER THE LAW, TOO YOUNG TO BE
WORKING HERE AT ALL.
I ASKED IF THE WESTERN FIRMS WHO
BOUGHT THE CLOTHES SHE MADE HAD
OFFERED ANYTHING TO HELP.
3,000 WORKERS USED TO CRAM INTO
WHAT WAS THIS BUILDING.
BUT THE LABELS IN THE DUST
SHOWING WHO WAS HERE.
COMPANIES LIKE PRIMARK WHO VOWED
TO HELP THE FAMILIES OF THE
DEAD, THEIR ORPHANS AND THE
INJURED.
AND PREMIER CLOTHING AMONG
OTHERS WHO SAID THEY WOULD
PROVIDE PRACTICAL AND FINANCIAL
HELP.
THE FIRMS CLAIMED THEY'VE
STARTED THE PROCESS, BUT THAT'S
NOT WHAT MANY HERE BELIEVE.
>> (translated): STILL TODAY,
THERE IS NO COMPENSATION ARE
GETTING THE WORKERS.
>> Reporter: "NO COMPENSATION
AND NOT ENOUGH PRINCIPLES," A
UNION LEADER TOLD ME.
>> (translated): THE MULTI-
NATIONAL AND FASHION RETAILER
CREATED THIS PROBLEM.
LOW WAGES.
LOW WORKING CONDITIONS.
THEN THEY CAN GET THE CHEAP
PRICES ALWAYS.
>> Reporter: BUT EVEN SHE WOULD
NOT TAKE THIS TRADE AWAY.
THE GARMENT BUSINESS HAS GROWN
AT A FRANTIC PACE.
PROVIDING JOBS FOR MORE THAN
FOUR MILLION PEOPLE.
BANGLADESH IS A DESPERATELY POOR
COUNTRY AND CAN'T AFFORD FOR IT
TO DISAPPEAR.
EIGHT PEOPLE WHO LIVED IN THIS
TINY ALLEYWAY WERE KILLED IN THE
COLLAPSE.
TWO-YEAR-OLD SIAM WILL BE
BROUGHT UP BY HIS GRANDPARENTS
NOW.
HIS MOTHER AND FATHER NEVER CAME
HOME FROM WORK THE DAY THE
FACTORY FELL.
THEY SAY THEY CAN'T BEAR THE
SORROW, BUT HAVE TO SURVIVE IN
THEIR HOME OF JUST ONE ROOM.
THEY'VE HEARD COMPENSATION COULD
BE DUE, BUT NO SIGN OF ANYTHING
YET.
HAVE YOU HAD ANY HELP FROM THE
WESTERN COMPANIES WHO PROMISED
TO DO SO?
>> (translated): NO, NOTHING
YET.
>> Reporter: WHETHER
COMPENSATION EVER COMES THROUGH,
NO MANUFACTURER HERE WOULD EVER
WANT TO TURN DOWN WESTERN WORK.
THIS FACTORY MAKES AS MANY AS
4,000 PAIRS OF JEANS EVERY DAY.
SIX DAYS A WEEK.
52 WEEKS A YEAR.
AND SO MANY OF US WILL HAVE
BOUGHT WHAT'S MADE HERE.
OFTEN AT BARGAIN PRICES.
WE MIGHT WANT CHEAP CLOTHES AND
THIS FACTORY MANAGER WANTS TO
PROTECT HIS WORKERS, BUT SAFETY
DOES NOT COME FOR FREE.
>> IF I HAVE MORE MONEY THAN I
HAVE THE ABILITY TO SPEND A LOT
OF THINGS FOR MY WORKERS AND
MAKE THE FACTORY CONDITION GOOD.
>> Reporter: SO IF BUYERS WERE
PREPARED TO PAY MORE, YOU WOULD
BE ABLE TO MAKE YOUR FACTORY
SAFER?
>> DEFINITELY, I BELIEVE.
>> Reporter: BUT AS NEW
FACTORIES ARE RUSHED UP TO MEET
DEMAND, IT'S PLAIN THAT COST IS
KEY.
PEOPLE ARE BEING PROSECUTED FOR
WHAT HAPPENED HERE.
IT'S HARD THEREFORE TO DRAW A
STRAIGHT LINE BETWEEN THIS
DISASTER AND OUR HUNGER FOR
CHEAP CLOTHES.
BUT THAT PRESSURE ON PRICE DOES
LEAD SOME FACTORY OWNERS TO CUT
CORNERS.
LOOKING AROUND, FEELING THE
SENSE OF LOSS HERE, YOU HAVE TO
ASK WHAT THAT DEMAND IS REALLY
WORTH.
WE TOOK OUR CAMERAS SECRETLY
INTO WHAT WE WERE TOLD WERE SOME
OF THE WORST SWEAT SHOPS.
THEY HAD GOOD REASON TO CRY TO
KEEP THE CONDITIONS TO
THEMSELVES.
THE DEAFENINGERALITY OF SEWING
MACHINES, ROW AFTER ROW, HUNDRED
AND HUNDRED OF YOUNG WORKERS,
MANY APPEARING UNDER 18, THE
LEGAL AGE FOR WORK.
THERE ARE MORE THAN 1,000
WORKERS IN THIS ONING ABOUT.
IT'S CRAMPED, CROWDED,
SWELTERING HOT, AND FACTORY
MANAGERS HAVE TOLD US THEY KNOW
CONDITIONS HERE ARE ILLEGAL.
UPON INDUSTRY CLAIMS IT'S
CLAMPING DOWN, BUT APPALLING
SWEAT SHOTS ARE AN ENTIRELY OPEN
SECRET.
EVEN THE PRESIDENT OF THE
COUNTRY'S WEALTHY FACTORY
OWNERS, HIMSELF THE BOSS OF
21,000 PEOPLE, SAYS AS MUCH.
>> OF COURSE IT'S VERY TRUE THAT
THEY CAN BREAK THE RULES.
>> Reporter: YOU ADMIT SOME
FACTORY OPENERS THINK THEY CAN
BREAK THE RULES.
>> WE ARE NOT POLICEMEN BUT WE
CAN SAY FROM OUR ASSOCIATION OR
FROM THE GOVERNMENT AS WELL,
PLEASE DON'T BREAK THE RULES.
IF YOU BREAK THE RULES, THIS
KIND OF INCIDENT WILL HAPPEN.
>> Reporter: THIS IS AN
INDUSTRY WORTH BILLIONS OF
DOLLARS.
THERE ARE FACTORY OWNERS MAKING
A LOT OF MONEY AND PAYING
WORKERS HARDLY ANYTHING.
>> THE RETAILER, THEY ARE MAKING
THE MONEY.
BUT THE FACTORY IS IS NOT THAT.
>> Reporter: ONLY MORSELS OF
ANY MONEY FIND THEIR WAY HERE.
THIS WARREN OF SLUMS IS WHERE
GARMENT WORKERS LIVE.
AFTER SIX DAYS, OFTEN WITH 12
HOURS OF WORK, THIS IS WHERE
THEY SPEND WHAT LITTLE RE THESTY
HAVE.
THERE IS NO RUNNING WATER.
BUT RAIN DRENCHES EVERYTHING
WHEN IT COMES.
CHILDREN GROWING UP IN A MAIZE
OF RAMSHACKLE CORRUGATED IRON.
THEIR HOMES ARE HARDLY BUILDINGS
AT ALL.
THIS 12-YEAR-OLD LEFT HER
PARENTS IN THE COUNTRYSIDE TO
MAKE A LIVING BUT AT THE MINIMUM
WAGE, 25 POUNDS A MONTH.
YOU CAN SEEN CRACKS IN THE
BUILDING WHERE YOU WORK?
SHE LIKES HER JOB BUT IS SCARED
AFTER THE FACTORY DISASTER.
SHE SAW CRACKS IN THE WALL OF
HER WORKPLACE BUT COULD NEVER
AFFORD TO LEAVE.
BANGLADESH HAS 5,000 FACTORIES
STITCHING CLOTHES.
THEY ARE NOT ALL LIKE THIS, BUT
HOW YOU CAN PREVENT THE PROBLEMS
OF THE FUTURE IF YOU IGNORE THE
DESPERATE PRESENT?
>> Ifill: AND NOW TO THE FIRST
IN A SERIES OF CONVERSATIONS
ABOUT A KEY ISSUE MAKING ITS WAY
THROUGH CONGRESS.
WE'RE CALLING IT "INSIDE
IMMIGRATION REFORM."
THE SENATE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE
TOOK A BIG STEP LAST NIGHT
TOWARD PROVIDING A PATH TO
CITIZENSHIP FOR 11 MILLION
UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS LIVING
IN THE UNITED STATES.
>> THE VOTES ARE 13 YEAS, FIVE
NAYS.
>> IT PASSED.
>> Ifill: THREE REPUBLICANS
JOINED TEN DEMOCRATS TO APPROVE
THE MEASURE AND SEND IT TO THE
SENATE FLOOR BY EARLY JUNE.
BUT BEFORE THE VOTE, COMMITTEE
DEMOCRATS WERE FORCED TO BACK
AWAY FROM A PROVISION THAT WOULD
HAVE SPECIFICALLY INCLUDED
PROTECTION FOR SAME SEX
IMMIGRANT COUPLES.
FOR MORE ON THE TRADEOFFS THAT
LED TO THE COMMITTEE VOTE, I'M
JOINED BY ALAN GOMEZ, WHO COVERS
THE ISSUE FOR "USA TODAY."
SO THE-- THIS BIG BOAT CAME
THIS-- VOTE CAME THIS CLOSE TO
NOT HAPPENING.
>> YSENATOR LEAHY, CHAIRMAN OF
THE COMMITTEE, INTRODUCED VERY
BRIEFLY THIS AMENDMENT THAT
WOULD HAVE EXTENDED THOSE RIGHTS
TO SAME-SEX COUPLES.
BASICALLY, IF YOU'RE A U.S.
CITIZEN HAVE A PERMANENT PARTNER
OVERSEAS OR SOMEBODY WHO IS HERE
AND UNDOCUMENTED OR ON A
TEMPORARY VIS AYOU WOULD BE
ALLOWED TO PETITION FOR THEM,
JUST AS OTHER COUPLES CAN IN
THIS COUNTRY.
HE INTRODUCED IT.
HE ALLOWED PEOPLE TO DEBATE IT.
A LOT OF DEMOCRATS ON THE COMMIT
COMMITTEE SUPPORTED IT, SAID HOW
MUCH THEY WANTED TO DO IT.
IT WAS A VERY EMOTIONAL HEARING,
A VERY-- IN A HEARING FILLED
WITH SO MUCH DETAIL AND POLICY,
IT WAS A VERY EMOTIONAL MOMENT
WHERE THEY WERE ABLE TO EXPRESS
THEIR SUPPORT FOR THIS.
BUT THEY ALL URGED LEAHY TO BACK
OFF AND NOT REQUEST A VOTE ON
THE AMENDMENT.
THEY WORRIED IT WOULD SINK THE
WHOLE BILL.
>> Ifill: BECAUSE THERE WERE
REPUBLICANS WHO SAID I'LL WALK
AWAY FROM THE WHOLE DEAL IF
THAT'S PART OF THE COMPROMISE AT
THE END.
>> EXACTLY.
THIS BILL WAS--
>> Ifill: WHO WERE THEY?
>> IT WAS WRITTEN BY THE GANG OF
EIGHT, EIGHT SENATORS,
BIPARTISAN SENATORS, BUT SENATOR
GRAHAM SPECIFICALLY IS ONE OF
THE MEMBERS OF THAT GROUP WHO
WROTE THE BILL AND SITS ON THE
COMMITTEE AND SAID YESTERDAY HE
BASICALLY SAID IF YOU PASS THIS,
THIS THING FAWLTZ APART BECAUSE
THIS GROUP FALLS APART.
>> Ifill: THAT WAS SENATOR
LINDSEY GRAHAM OF SOUTH
CAROLINA?
>> YES DISPLIEFL WHAT WAS THE
REACTION FROM THE
L.G.B.T. COMMUNITY PUSHING FOR
THIS SO HARD AND AS YOU SAID
EMOTIONALLY TO BE INCLUDED?
>> THIS WAS A BIG, BIG BLOW.
I DON'T THINK ANYBODY IN THAT
COMMUNITY EXPECTS THIS TO
SUDDENLY APPEAR IN THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES.
IT'S REPUBLICAN LED, VERY
CONSERVATIVE.
THEY'RE AWARE OF THE FACT THEY
DON'T HAVE MUCH OF A SHOT OVER
THERE.
AT THIS POINT, ALL THEY GOT WAS
TO GET THIS ON THE SENATE FLOOR
AND THAT'S A MUCH MORE DIFFICULT
THING TO DO.
THIS WAS A DEMOCRAT-LED
COMMITTEE.
THEY THOUGHT THAITD VOTES.
THEY WERE LOBBYING VERY HARD IN
THIS CASE, THE DEMOCRATS ON THE
COMMITTEE, TO HOLD FIRM AND GET
IT ON TO THE BILL.
THEY DIDN'T REALLY BOTHER TRYING
TO LOBBY THE REPUBLICAN MEMBERS
OF THE COMMITTEE, ASSUMING THEY
WEREN'T GOING TO SWING THEM OVER
ON SUCH A TOUGH ISSUE.
AND, OBVIOUSLY, IT DIDN'T WORK
OUT UNDER THEM.
>> Ifill: SAUSAGE MAKING IS
SOMETIMES THE MOST FASCINATING
AND FRUSTRATING PART OF THE
LEGISLATIVE PROCESS.
WHAT ELSE WAS INCLUDED OR
EXCLUDED IN THE PROCESS AS THEY
WERE GETTING TO THIS COMMITTEE
VOTE.
>> IT'S REALLY BEEN-- THEY HAD
FIVE HEARINGS AND THEY HEARD
OVER 200 AMENDMENTS.
AND I COULD BORE YOU FOR QUITE A
BILE WHOOIL DISCUSSING WHAT THEY
GOT INTO, BUT SOME OF THE THINGS
THEY REALLY ADDRESSED AND ARE
CLEAR ARE GOING TO CONTINUE TO
BE ISSUES ARE BORDER SECURITY.
CONSERVATIVES, REPUBLICANS, RAY
REALLY WANT-- NEED FOR THIS BILL
TO ENSURE IT'S GOING TO FINALLY
SECURE THE BORDER AND WE'RE NOT
GOING TO GET ANOTHER WAVE OF
ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS COMING INTO
THE COUNTRY.
WHAT THEY WERE ABLE TO DO IS GET
SOME STEPS.
THEY WERELE ORIGINAL
BILL REQUIRED FOR 100% OF THE
BORDERS TO BE MONITORED BY
BORDER PATROL, AND 90% OF PEOPLE
TRYING TO CROSS OVER TO BE
TURNED BACK.
BUT THE ORIGINAL BILL ONLY ASKED
FOR THAT IN THREE SECTORS.
CHUCK GRASSLEY, SENATOR FROM
IOWA, WAS ABLE TO EXTEND IT FOR
THE ENTIRE BORDER.
>> Ifill: BUT THERE WERE ALSO
EXWEZ WHO GETS TO COME IN, NOT
ONLY GAYS AND LESBIANS, BUT ALSO
WHAT KINDS OF WORKERS GET TO
COME IN.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
WHAT THE BILL DOES IS EXPAND THE
LEGAL IMMIGRATION SYSTEM.
PART OF THE REASON WE HAVE SO
MANY UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS,
THE LEGAL IMMIGRATION SYSTEM--
IT'S ONE THING EVERYBODY AGREES
ON-- IS BROKEN.
THEY'RE BRINGING IN MORE
COMPUTER ENGINEERS, MORE PEOPLE
WHO WORK IN THOSE FIELDS.
BUT IT ALSO CREATES A VISA FOR
LOW-SKILLED WORKERS IN THE
RESTAURANT AND RETAIL INDUSTRY
AND THAT'S WHERE WE'VE SEEN A
LOT PEOPLE COME IN.
IT PROITDZ THESE AVENUES
HOPEFULLY TO FET THE WORKERS
THAT U.S. BUSINESSES NEED SO
THAT THAT MAGNET OF JOBS ISN'T
THERETO FOR THEM TO TRY AND COME
IN THE FUTURE.
>> Ifill: WE JUST SAW THE
VIDEO OF THE CELEBRATION THAT
WENT ON BUT THERE ARE A LOT OF
PRESSURE POINTS COMING ON THE
SENATE AND HOUSE IF ALL KINDS OF
EXTERNAL PLACES BHOP ARE THOSE
PEOPLE WHO ARE IN THERE, WHO ARE
LOBBYING, WHO ARE PRESSURING TO
GET THINGS IN OR OUT OF THIS
KIND OF LEGISLATION.
>> FIRST OF ALL, I DON'T KNOW IF
SENATOR LEAHY HAS HAD HIS NAME
CHANTED LIKE THAT IN QUITE A
DeWITT BIT AFTER THE HEARING
ONCE IT WAS PASSED.
BUT THERE REMAIN MANY POINTS
WHERE THIS THING CAN FALL APART.
ONE EXAMPLE, ORRIN HATCH, IT WAS
VERY IMPORTANT TO GET HIS VOTE
AND THEY WORKED OUT A COMPROMISE
FOR HIGH-SKILLED WORKERS TO COME
IN, MADE IT A LITTLE BIT EASIER
FOR U.S. BUSINESSES TO HIRE
THOSE FOREIGN WORKERS BUT AT THE
SAME TIME THAT REALLY UPSET
LABOR UNIONS IN THE COUNTRY.
THE AFL-CIO RESPOND VERY ANGRILY
TO THE AMENDMENT.
THEY STILL SUPPORT THE BILL, AND
BUTT THOSE ARE THE KINDS OF
THINGS THEY'LL BE LOOKING FOR IN
THE WEEKS AHEAD.
>> Ifill: BRIEFLY, WHAT WAS
THE WHITE HOUSE'S ROLE IN THIS.
THEY WERE PUSHING FOR THE GAY
AND LESBIAN PORTION.
>> THEY WERE PUSHING VERY HARD
FOR THE GAY AND LESBIAN
AMENDMENT.
THERE WAS AN A.P. REPORT THAT
THE WHITE HOUSE ASKED LEAHY NOT
TO INTRODUCE IT.
THE WHITE HOUSE, JAY CARNEY
TODAY SAID HE DID NOT-- HE'S NOT
AWARE OF THAT CONVERSAONTI
TAKING PLACE.
LEAHY'S OFFICE SAYS THEY DON'T
TALK ABOUT PRIVATE DISCUSSIONS
THEY HAVE.
AND THE WHITE HOUSE IS FIGHTING
BACK TO THAT.
BUT THEY-- YOU KNOW, HE'S MADE
VERY CLEAR THAT HE SUPPORTS THE
AMENDMENT AS FAR AS THE POLITICS
OF WHETHER HE GOT IN THERE AND
ASKED FOR HIM TO PULL IT BACK
WE'RE NOT SURE.
>> Ifill: MANY STEPS TO GO.
FIRST THE FULL SENATE AND THEN
THE HOUSE.
WE'LL BE TALKING ABOUT THIS A
LOT.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH, ALAN GOMEZ,
"USA TODAY."
WE'LL HAVE MORE ON THE EMERGING
LEGISLATION IN COMING DAYS.
AND ON OUR WEBSITE, WE TAKE A
LOOK AT A VIRTUAL MARCH BEING
LAUNCHED ONLINE, IN SUPPORT OF
THE IMMIGRATION LAW.
THAT'S AT newshour.pbs.org.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY TONIGHT:
BRINGING OPERA TO THE COMMUNITY
AND THE COMMUNITY INTO OPERA.
JEFF IS BACK WITH THAT STORY.
>> Brown: A TRAGIC DEATH SCENE,
A LYRICAL DUET AND AN EPIC TALE
OF FAMILY AND HISTORY-- THEERY V
STUFF OF GRAND OPERA.
BUT THIS IS "CRUZAR LA CARA DE
LA LUNA"-- "TO CROSS THE FACE OF
THE MOON," COMPOSED IN 2010 AND
BILLED AS THE FIRST "MARIACHI
OPERA."
IT'S PART OF AN EXPERIMENT BY
ONE OF THE NATION'S LEADING
OPERA COMPANIES, TO REACH NEW
AUDIENCES, BECOME A BETTER
NEIGHBOR IN ITS COMMUNITY AND,
JUST MAYBE, HELP SECURE THE
FUTURE OF AN ART FORM.
>> I BELIEVE THAT THE
RESPONSIBILITY OF AN ARTS
INSTITUTION IS TO BROADEN OUR
ART AND TAKE IT TO AS MANY
PEOPLE AS WANT TO SEEK IT.
WE HAVE AN EDUCATIONAL AND
EMBRACING RESPONSIBILITY WITH
I THINK THAT'S A BIGGER
RESPONSIBILITY THAN FILLING THE
SEATS IN THE THEATER.
>> Brown: PATRICK SUMMERS,
ARTISTIC DIRECTOR OF THE HOUSTON
GRAND OPERA, IS HARDLY GIVING UP
ON THE CLASSICS.
ON THE DAY OF OUR VISIT, HE
REHEARSED SINGERS PREPARING FOR
A PRODUCTION OF VERDI'S "IL
TROVATORE."
AND THE COMPANY IS MOUNTING A
NEW VERSION OF WAER'GNS "RING"
CYCLE IN THE NEXT FEW YEARS.
BUT AMID RAPID DEMOGRAPHIC
CHANGE-- AS HOUSTON HAS BECOME
ONE OF THE MOST DIVERSE BIG
CITIES IN THE COUNTRY, WHERE
MINORITIES MAKE UP THE MAJORITY
OF THE POPULATION-- THE COMPANY
DECIDED IT HAD NO CHOICE BUT TO
RE-THINK ITS ROLE.
>> WE ABSORB EACH OTHER'S
CULTURE AND WHAT COMES OUT IS
SOMETHING VERY UIQUENLY
AMERICAN.
THAT'S HOW I VIEW HOUSTON.
AND THAT'S VERY MUCH HOW I VIEW
THE ROLE OF THE HOUSTON GRAND
OPERA-- TO REFLECT THAT YOUTHFUL
IMMIGRANT CITY.
>> Brown: THE EFFORT BEGAN SIX
YEARS WITH A PRODUCTION CALLED
"THE REFUGE", WHICH TOLD STORIES
OF REFUGEES FROM AROUND THE
WORLD WHO'VE SETTLED IN HOUSTON.
IT WAS THE BRAINCHILD OF THEN
GENERAL DIRECTOR ANTHONY FREUD,
WHO CREATED H.G.O.-CO.-- HOUSTON
GRAND OPERA COMPANY COMMUNITY
COLLABORATION.
MORE THAN A DOZEN WORKS HAVE
FOLLOWED.
MOST RECENTLY, ONE CALLED
"MEMORY STONE" ABOUT MEMBERS OF
HOUSTON'S ASIAN COMMUNITY AFTER
THE 2011 TSUNAMI IN JAPAN.
ALL HAVE BEEN BASED ON REAL
PEOPLE AND EXPERIENCES AND ARE
OFTEN PERFORMED IN SMALLER
NEIGHBORHOOD VENUES AROUND THE
CITY.
>> I WANT TO KNOW WHAT YOU
DETECTED AS THEMES.
I WANT TO KNOW IF SOME OF THOSE
THEMES CHANGED WHEN YOU SAT IN
AN AUDIENCE WITH YOUR COMMUNITY.
>> Brown: SANDRA BERNHARD HEADS
H.G.O.-CO. AND ON THIS EVENING
WAS NOT IN THE OPERA HOUSE BUT A
COMMUNITY CENTER MEETING WITH
HISPANIC TEENS AND LOCAL
LEADERS.
>> OUR JOB IS TO LISTEN TO THE
COMMUNITY.
WE SHOW UP, YOU LISTEN, YOU SHOW
UP AGAIN.
YOU LISTEN.
YOU SHOW UP AGAIN.
>> Brown: AND THEN WHEN DO YOU
START DOING SOMETHING?
AND WHAT DO YOU DO?
>> WHAT WE DO IS TELL THE
STORIES OF THOSE WHO CALL
HOUSTON THEIR HOME.
AND WE DO THAT THROUGH SMALL
WORKS, THROUGH CHAMBER WORKS,
THROUGH WRITING SONGS ABOUT
THINGS THAT PEOPLE CARE ABOUT.
>> Brown: SOME CRITICS HAVE
ASKED: THIS IS FINE AS COMMUNITY
OUTREACH, BUT IS IT REALLY
OPERA?
BERNHARD'S RESPONSE: DON'T SWEAT
THE STRICT DEFINITIONS.
>> SOMETIMES IT DOESN'T LOOK
LIKE AN OPERA AND SOMETIMES
OPERA CAN BE DEFINED AS
STORYTELLING WITH WORDS AND
MUSIC.
THAT'S HOW WE LIKE TO DEFINE IT.
SOMETIMES IT'S NOT ABOUT GRAND.
>> Brown: LAST YEAR THE COMPANY
STAGED A WORK TITLED, "PAST THE
CHECKPOINTS," ABOUT AN
UNDOCUMENTED MEXICAN YOUTH
LIVING IN TEXAS.
THE COMPANY PARTNERED WITH TEENS
IN AN AFTERSCHOOL TRAINING
PROGRAM CALLED "DIGITAL
CONNECTORS" AND GOT THE YOUNG
PEOPLE, INCLUDING 16-YEAR-OLD
PABLO FLORES AND SAN JUANA BANDA
TO COME SEE AND HELP MARKET THE
PRODUCTION USING THEIR NEW
SKILLS.
WHAT WAS THAT LIKE?
>> I WAS WORRIED THAT WE DIDN'T
HAVE THE EXPERIENCE FOR DOING
THIS.
>> WE TOOK IT STEP BY STEP AND
WE WERE ALL COMMUNICATING AND I
THINK WE DID A PRETTY GOOD JOB.
>> WE WERE TRYING TO TARGET THE
YOUTH.
I KNOW IN OPERA, A LOT OF
TEENAGERS DON'T CARE ABOUT
OPERA.
IT'S NOT THEIR THING.
AND I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT FOR
THEM TO KNOW ABOUT OPERA.
>> Brown: IF IT'S NOT THEIR
THING, HOW DID YOU TRY TO REACH
THEM?
>> WITH SOCIAL MEDIA.
WE CREATED A FACEBOOK PAGE.
WE SENT INVITATIONS ABOUT THE
OPERA.
>> Brown: THE TEENS ALSO ENJOYED
THEIR FIRST VISIT TO AN OPERA.
>> PEOPLE WANT TO SEE THEIR
STORY BEING PLAYED IN THE OPERA.
THEY WANT TO SAY, "OH, I CAN
RELATED TO THAT.
THAT'S WHAT I WENT THROUGH."
>> Brown: AND THEY THOUGHT IT
WAS IMPORTANT FOR ANGLO
AUDIENCES TO SEE AS WELL.
>> THEY DON'T KNOW WHAT A
MAJORITY OF PEOPLE LIVI INNG
HOUSTON GO THROUGH OR HAVE BEEN
GOING THROUGH.
IT SHOWS A PART OF HOUSTON THAT
IS NOT REALLY TOLD THAT MUCH.
>> Brown: 74-YEAR-OLD YANI ROSE
KEO KNOWS THAT SIDE OF HOUSTON
THROUGH HARD-EARNED PERSONAL AND
PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE AND NOW
SHE'S SEEN HER STORY TOLD
ONSTAGE.
KEO FLED HER NATIVE CAMBODIA IN
1975.
SEVERAL MEMBERS OF HER FAMILY
WERE KILLED BY THE KHMER ROUGE.
SHE EVENTUALLY CAME TO HOUSTON
AND STARTED A NON-PROFIT
ORGANIZATION THAT PROVIDES JOB
TRAINING AND SOCIAL SERVICES TO
IMMIGRANTS FROM ALL OVER THE
WORLD.
THREE YEARS AGO, SHE GOT A CALL
FROM THE HOUSTON GRAND OPERA.
>> SHE SAID, "YANI, I WOULD LIKE
TO TALK TO YOU ABOUT YOUR LIFE."
I SAID, "ARE YOU SURE?
BECAUSE OUR CULTURE DOESN'T TELL
THE WORLD."
>> Brown: IN YOUR CULTURE, YOU
DON'T WANT TO TELL THE WORLD
YOUR STORY?
>> NOT TO TELL YOUR OWN PERSONAL
STORY TO ANYONE.
>> Brown: EVENTUALLY SHE DECIDED
TO WORK WITH A WRITER AND
COMPOSER.
AND THE RESULT WAS "NEW
ARRIVALS."
>> THE FIRST TIME I SAW IT, I
CRIED AND CRIED.
I CAN CLOSE MY EYES AND I CAN
SEE WHAT MY FAMILY WENT THROUGH.
HOW HARD THEY WENT THROUGH.
AND EVEN THE ANGER I WENT
THROUGH.
I CHANGED MY ANGER INTO PEACE
AND LOVE.
>> Brown: COMPANIES AROUND THE
THE NEED TO ENGAGE AND BUILD NEW
AUDIENCES.
IN THE MEANTIME, "CRUZAR", THE
MARIACHI OPERA HAS BEGUN A LIFE
BEYOND HOUSTON.
IT'S BEEN PRODUCED IN CHICAGO,
SAN DIEGO AND EVEN PARIS.
AND NEXT YEAR, THE COMPANY WILL
SPOTLIGHT A DIFFERENT KIND OF
LOCAL COMMUNITY, AS IT DEVELOPS
AN OPERA BASED ON THE STORIES OF
IRAQ WAR VETERANS RETURNING TO
HOUSTON.
>> Woodruff: ONLINE, WATCH AN
EXCERPT FROM THE WORLD'S FIRST
MARIACHI OPERA AND LEARN MORE
ABOUT HOW THE HOUSTON GRAND
OPERA IS ENGAGING WITH
RESIDENTS.
AND AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY:
OFFICIALS IN MOORE, OKLAHOMA
REPORTED 12,000 TO 13,000 HOMES
DAMAGED OR DESTROYED IN MONDAY'S
TORNADO, AND INSURANCE LOSSES
TOPPING $2 BILLION.
AND THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
ACKNOWLEDGED, FOR THE FIRST
TIME, THAT U.S. DRONE STRIKES
HAVE KILLED FOUR AMERICAN
CITIZENS SINCE 2009.
>> Ifill: ONLINE, THE SCIENCE
BEHIND THE BUILDING OF A
TORNADO.
HARI SREENIVASAN HAS MORE.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ARE THE
ATMOSPHERIC CONDITIONS THAT LEAD
TO THE FORMATION OF TORNADOES?
AND WHAT WERE THE FACTORS THAT
MADE MONDAY'S TWISTER SO HUGE?
WE HAVE AN EXPLAINER, IN TODAY'S
SCIENCE WEDNESDAY REPORT.
AND SUICIDE RATES IN THE U.S.
RISE AND FALL WITH THE ECONOMY.
WHAT CAN THE CURRENT TREND TELL
US ABOUT OUR ECONOMIC AND MENTAL
HEALTH?
ECONOMICS CORRESPONDENT PAUL
SOLMAN DISCUSSES THAT TOPIC ON
MAKING SENSE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR
WEBSITE newshour.pbs.org.
JUDY?
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
"NEWSHOUR" FOR TONIGHT.
ON THURSDAY, WE'LL LOOK AT,
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S SPEECH ON THE
USE OF LETHAL DRONE STRIKES.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
WE'LL SEE YOU ON-LINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
THANK YOU AND GOOD NIGHT.